---
head.title: 'Contributing - Financial Freedom by Server Side Up'
title: 'Contributing'
description: 'Learn how to contribute to Financial Freedom.'
layout: docs
---

# Contributing
::lead-p
Follow this guide to learn how to get Financial Freedom up and running locally.
::

::note
⚠️ This project is in the early stages of development. Before opening a pull request, please open a discussion to explain the change you wish to make. [Learn how to request features →](https://github.com/serversideup/financial-freedom/discussions/63)
::

## Running locally in your development
We encourage you to replicate this on your machine and tinker around with it. Here is how you can run it.

**Important notes:**
* We user Docker to run our entire stack. No local services are required.
* Be sure if you have MAMP, XAMPP, or any other local services running, that you shut them down first. They will conflict with the ports we use.
* We use [Docker Overrides](https://docs.docker.com/compose/extends/), which allow us to apply overrides on a per environment basis
* We have a tool called [Spin](https://serversideup.net/open-source/spin/) which greatly improves the development experience
* `spin` is automatically installed via Composer for this project

## Recommended: Install Spin to your machine
Spin is lightweight and only takes up 300kb of space. It's a bash wrapper for Docker compose and dramatically improves the developer experience for Laravel developers regardless if they are running macOS, Windows, and Linux.

If you need help configuring your machine with Docker, follow the instructions provided by Spin.

[Learn how to install Docker with Spin →](https://serversideup.net/open-source/spin/docs)

## Alternative: Add Spin as an alias
::note
Regardless if you choose to install Spin or not, you will need Docker installed on your machine.
::

If prefer to not install Spin to your machine, you can use the version that is installed automatically via Composer. To do that, you will need to run the following command each time you want to use `spin`:

::code-panel
---
label: Run `spin` from Composer
---
```sh
bash vendor/bin/spin
```
::

To shorten the command for using the Composer version of Spin, you can create an aliased command:

::code-panel
---
label: Create an aliased command for `spin`
---
```sh
alias spin='[ -f node_modules/.bin/spin ] && bash node_modules/.bin/spin || bash vendor/bin/spin'
```
::

Add the above line to your `~/.bash_profile` or `~/.zshrc` file. After saving the changes, `source` that file or simply close and re-open your terminal before continuing.

::note
The remainder of this guide assumes you have a properly functioning `spin` command.
::

## Clone the repo
Pull the repo down into and folder of your choice.

::code-panel
---
label: Clone the repo
---
```sh
git clone git@github.com:serversideup/financial-freedom.git
```
::

## Copy over the example env file
Ensure you have a `.env` file in the root of your project. If you don't, copy over the example file.

::code-panel
---
label: Copy over the example env file
---
```sh
cp .env.example .env
```
::

## Install composer dependencies
Assuming you aliased `spin` as defined above, run the following commands. If you didn't, you will need to use `bash vendor/bin/spin` instead of `spin`.

::code-panel
---
label: Install composer dependencies
---
```sh
spin run php composer install
```
::

## Install Node dependencies
Using spin to run the command will ensure you have the exact version of Node and Yarn that we use.

::code-panel
---
label: Install Node dependencies
---
```sh
spin run node yarn install
```
::

## Generate a new Laravel app key
Create a new Laravel app key. This will be used for encrypting your sessions and other important data.

::code-panel
---
label: Generate a new Laravel app key
---
```sh
spin run php php artisan key:generate
```
::

## Run Database migrations
Create your local SQLite database and run the migrations.

::code-panel
---
label: Run Database migrations
---
```sh
spin run php php artisan migrate
```
::

## Configure hosts file
The server expects a URL of "https://financialfreedom.dev.test". For that to resolve, you can set your local machine hosts file.

::code-panel
---
label: Configure hosts file
---
```txt
# For accessing the Financial Freedom locally
127.0.0.1 financialfreedom.dev.test

# For accessing Mailpit locally
127.0.0.1 mailpit.dev.test

# For using Vite in development
127.0.0.1 vite.dev.test
```
::

## Bring your containers up
::code-panel
---
label: Bring your development environment up
---
```sh
spin up
```
::

## If you're making changes to the front-end
We use InertiaJS as a frontend javascript library. If you are making changes, you will need to run the "dev" process within Node.

::code-panel
---
label: Run the "dev" process within Node
---
```sh
spin run node yarn dev
```
::

## Accessing the application
Once you have the application online, you can register an account at https://financialfreedom.dev.test/register